Hello, welcome to RxJS fundamentals.
This is an intro course on how to use
RxJS to solve some common problems.
With that, there is one,
no expectation that you've used
RxJS before, so that's good.
We're also gonna be completely
framework agnostic.
I know that a lot of times our RxJS is
associated with Angular these days, but
you can use it with anything.
I've used it with React and Redux before,
I use it today in this svelte
app that I work on, it is at
the end of the day just JavaScript.
So we're gonna play with it agnostic
of any framework and again,
we're gonna start from the very basics,
and kind of build up an understanding.
Cuz in my experience, there's a lot of
great content on RxJS, but a lot of times,
it's like let's go into some conceptual
understanding of marble diagrams.
And then all of a sudden, escalates
quickly until there's seven nested
observables and you're like, I wanna cry.
So we're taking things very slowly, we're
gonna build up from each piece as we get
to some more sophisticated
examples towards the end.
So we will kind of play around
with some basic unit tests,
you understand how some of
the fundamental parts of RxJS work.
We'll start building some very kind of
simple interactions in some applications.
And we'll solve some of
the kinda common UX issues
that come up that RxJS is just
really well suited to handle.
In a lot of cases, you don't necessarily
need to use RxJS for everything.
So part of this is understanding where
a simple promise will do, and where
you might end up in a situation where
things are getting a little squirrely.
At the end of the day,
anything you can do in RxJS,
you can do in regular JavaScript because
RxJS is built in regular JavaScript.
The big question is should you, right?
Enough of these things where you
start reinventing the wheel and
throwing global variables or even module
scoped global variables everywhere.
And then eventually, you and
your team developed a deep resentment for
you, which I'm gonna try to
save you from during this.
So, let's just talk,
we're not gonna do a whole lot of
the kind of conceptual theory here.
I wanna start getting our hands
dirty very, very quickly.
But let's do just at least a high level
understanding of what's going on,
what is RxJS?
What did you just sign up for?
What are we gonna be talking about for
the next little bit?
So then I saw this quote
from the RxJS documentation,
you can think of RxJS like Lodash for
events.
In Lodash, we have a lot of helper
functions for dealing with arrays and
objects, and all the stuff that just
comes with JavaScript not really
having a standard library to speak of,
right?
So Lodash gives us a bunch
of utility functions.
Yes, you could write them yourselves.
But a lot of times if you want them
kind of tweaked for performance,
everything along those lines using
a battle tested library makes sense.
RxJS Is basically dealing with that,
but things that happen over time.
And you're like, okay, like what?
Well, if you think about it, the way that
our applications work is, we send the code
to the browser, we send some HTML,
loads of some CSS and some JavaScript.
We render an initial page,
the traditional web page, right?
And then really,
everything that happens after that, right,
as soon as we load up that HTML page and
run through the initial scripts,
the event loop kind of just sits there and
waits for stuff to happen, right?
And all that stuff that can happen is
an area where there is a chance that RxJS
might be helpful, depending on what kind
of problem you are trying to solve, right?
Things are gonna happen over time.
Arrays give you a collection
of things all at once.
You can work through the array.
You can map over it, you can filter it.
But if those values come in over time,
maybe through a series of click events,
maybe through a timer,
maybe with an API requests, right?
Yeah, you can load it into an array,
recheck the array, or you can just kind of
think about things as streams of events
happening in our application and
write code around that as we go.
So, there is an abstraction for
asynchronous values that is now
in the Ekman script standard,
and it's called promises.
And promises are great.
I love promises, they're wonderful.
The problem with promises, and this is
not really a problem with them, it's just
what they promised to do, is that they
resolve to one eventual value, right?
And so you have a promise
of this one API request or
one thing that happens,
it becomes a value.
Now imagine programming without arrays or
objects, right?
It's up a series of go to statements,
you could figure it out, it'd be great.
But the idea of having this
idea of a collection, right?
The way you can think of
a promise as one eventual value,
I think a really good mental model that
could be helpful is thinking about
effectively an observable as
an array of eventual values.
So promises are one just like
a primitive like a number, a string, or
even a JavaScript object is one object.
And an array can be a set of them.
A promise is good for one value,
that could also be an array in this case.
An observable is things that
are gonna happen kind of over time.
So let's talk a little bit about
what some of those things might be.
We have APIs, right?
And yes, you send a promise, you go get
the JSON or what have you from an API.
Great, but there's a whole bunch of like
edge cases, like do you wanna refresh,
stuff along those lines?
So promises are great for a happy path.
You even have a catch in the case
that it doesn't work out.
What if you wanna try,
retry a certain number of times.
Okay, well yeah, you could maybe
keep a value somewhere in scope and
just try to iterate it, and then write
an if statement, so on and so forth.
You can see how this things
start to get a little squirrely.
What happens if you wanna reload
the data at a regular rate?
Okay, now you can do a set interval, and
you can aspire to clean up that
interval and help you get it right.
But you're also matching that with now
the retry thing that we just talked about.
What happens is you wanna iterate
across a paginated API, right?
A lot of times as front end engineer, the
reason that I'm employable is because for
a lot of the UI that we wanna build,
the API's don't support that.
So I have to do a bunch of Rube Goldberg
machines in order to get the UI in place.
So if we need to start iterating
recursively, then yes, you could do that.
But could you do that with retries?
Could you do that with
a regular refresh interval?
Starting to pull all these pieces
together like any one thing,
maybe not that complicated.
Pulling it all together requires
a better abstraction so
that we don't get lost
in our own complexity.
So observables can help with all of this.
This is the other part.
I used to work at a company
that I will not name.
But we had this idea of a user, right?
And you need to know the current
user to figure out what you
are gonna show on the page.
That seems fine, right?
And there was an API for
getting the current user.
However, if you wanted to know whether it
was a regular account or a sub account,
well, that was another API.
Did you want to know if it was part
of a team or an individual account?
That was another API.
Did you wanna know if it's a free or
premium account?
Well, that was another API.
So in order to figure out what to show
on the page, we had to send out this
battalion of API requests and
try to orchestrate it all at once.
And so we have a lot of situations
where to show a given piece of UI,
maybe you have a list index
that only gives you the IDs of
the things that match if you
want to figure out more data,
you have to go hit each one of
those individually API's, right?
Coordinating all that stuff can
be some what complicated and
so observables seek to help us with that,
right?
And to help us deal with the common error
path and just give us a effectively.
RxJS is not a framework but
if we think about like a scaffolding or
a framework for dealing with
the complexity of orchestrating
multiple things that could
happen asynchronously.
So observables can help with this as well.
Then there's also just little UX
quality of life things, right?
It's usually good to show
a loading indicator, right?
And that's fine, but how soon do you
show the loading indicator, right?
Cuz the first time I implement that,
this is what happens,
is the API ends up being fast, and then
I showed a loading indicator flashes for
a hot minute and then it vanishes, right?
And so how do you time it?
Okay, I only wanna show the loading
indicator in one situation,
if it takes a certain amount of time
show the loading indicator, right?
But what if the API request comes back
right after I show the loading indicator?
Well, even if the API has failed, I might
wanna still show the loading indicator for
long enough time that's not
visually distracting to the user,
even if we're done loading, right?
These are the issues of dealing with
events that happen over time and
coordinating all of these things
that RxJS seeks to help us with.
There's all sorts of little other things
like dragging and dropping, right?
If you think about that problem,
you end up, all right, so
on mouse down on the element
that we wanna click, cool.
Then I want to set up an event
listener that is listening for
mouse movements until they release and
we have a mouse up event, right?
And then we also have the issue of
where they're dragging might have other
implications in our UI, right?
If it is a hover state where they
can drop it in that given area,
we might wanna show different things.
So reacting to all those things and
setting up all those different movement
events can be super helpful as well.
So that's the pitch.
That is hopefully I've sold you on
spending some time together learning this.